Okay? Okay. You got the tape going? The tape is rolling. Okay. What I've done,
Mr. Knight, is simply to, as I said, you've done so much. You've been so
involved in the field that it was hard to get a handle on how to approach this.
But what I've done is sort of divide up into different areas, and I'll ask you
some brief questions on each one. And the first one would involve your entry
into science fiction. You came through the fan structure, and I wondered if you
could explain how you were introduced to that. I sort of thought that might come
up, and I was rooting about it a little yesterday.
Actually, I was thinking, what if you asked me to where I would contribute my
gigantic success? I would have to say mostly luck. I can trace my career back
through a series of just astounding coincidences, really unlikely things, all
the way back to Hugo Gernsback. And I can demonstrate that at each of these
points, If something rather unlikely had not happened, I wouldn't be doing what
I'm doing. For instance, if Hugo Gernsback had not come to this country from
Luxembourg when he was 14 and started a magazine called Amazing Stories in 1926,
you'll see as I go on that none of the other things could have happened. So here
I am, a 13-year-old kid in Hood River, Oregon, reading science fiction
magazines, really turned on by them. and through the back pages of one of these
magazines super science stories then edited by Frederick Bull I found out about
the fanzines and rode away for a few and this way got into correspondence with
the Futurians including then Bull and Wollheim and Cyril Kornbluth and a bunch of
others Robert Dudley Lowndes I was trying to write some stories and I sent a
couple to Lowndes, who was then acting as a sort of half-assed literary agent.
And all these things added up together until Donald A. Wollheim got an offer from
a publisher to edit a new science fiction magazine. He had no budget, whatever,
for stories. And he knew about me from Lowndes. Lowndes wrote to me saying, will
you donate this story to the first issue of Superstirring Science Story? And of
course I said yes. I would have paid for the privilege. And as a consequence of
that, the Futurians invited me to come and be a Futurian, live in one of their
communal dwellings in New York when I was 18. Terribly unlikely thing, just a
series of them, even as far as we've gone. And I lived there a couple of years
doing little illustrations from magazines and trying to write. Not deceiving
very much. And then in 1943, Again, it was Fred Pohl, got me a job at popular
publications where he was working. I needed an assistant editor, and he knew I
would work cheap. So he got me an interview where I got the job. Spent about a
year there, and I'm perfectly convinced now, looking back, that it was that
training at popular publications that enabled me to write fiction
professionally. It was a training that you couldn't get in any school. How did
you get it now? But it just kind of soaked in because I was reading the slush
pile, the unsolicited manuscripts, and it became perfectly obvious after a while
what the difference was between the stuff we were rejecting and the stuff we
were printing. So when I quit that job, I started writing and went on from
there. I did another stint later at Popular, 1949. And I also worked for a while
at the Scott Merritt's Literary Agency, which was a reading fee agency, where we
would get these awful manuscripts and have to criticize them. I think that
helped me a good deal, too. If I could recommend the writing, or the training
for young writers, I would certainly say it's too bad that those pulp magazines
don't exist anymore. You can possibly get an editorial job or anything of that
kind. Even a terrible job in the reading fee literary agency. Okay. Okay, we
talked to Frederick Pohl some time ago and he told us a little about the
Futurians and of course you've written a book on that too Could you be a little
more specific, sort of briefly what your relationship with the Futurians was
what exactly they did? Well, the Futurians were a very informal organization of
science fiction bands who were trying to become professional and in some cases
had a little bit of impact of success here and there, published stories. I told
you that Wollheim was editing a magazine. Before him, Pohl had become an editor.
After him, Lowndes also became an editor. They were writing and publishing a
little bit, not much.
To save money, because they were all very poor, they lived in a communal
apartment. At that time in New York, in the late 30s and early 40s, There were
lots of apartments among them that were very cheap. I forget now. I think the
rental might have been about 30 bucks for a four-bedroom railroad flat. If you
had four people living there, it was quite cheap. And we divided up the
household duties around with the cooking. And I did the fish washing, which I
hated. We were dirtboard. We really didn't have any money at all. We rolled our
own cigarettes, and we bought the cheapest wine we could find, which was
something like 85 cents a gallon.
Our major entertainment was walking down from 102nd Street, or 103rd, it was,
down to Times Square, and looking at the bright lights and having a cup of
coffee in the cafeteria and then walking home.
I read once where your actually your first professional sale was a cartoon is
that right I suppose that's right I hadn't thought about that it was a cartoon
that I sent to Amazing Stories which was before I went to New York before I told
a story I must have been 17
I sent some other ones and I didn't like them okay your if I'm correct here
your earliest work in the fanzines was of a critical nature and I wondered if
that's true why you started out with did you just have a critical bent or did
you not want to write creatively at first I was trying to write fiction at that
time and not succeeding I couldn't finish stories I didn't have any idea of how
you got to the end of the story but I was extremely critical and starting like
any other right 17 or 18 year old fan
The first stuff I did for fanzines was not critical in the usual sense. I mean,
it wasn't book-reviewed or that kind of thing, but it was parody mostly. The
things that I thought were really outstandingly dumb in the magazine, funny
enough to parody, and I did a lot of that. But when I say a lot, I lie, because
I only published two issues of my fanzines and did very little for other
magazines. It was much later, sorry, about 1945, I think. I did a long critical
essay about Van Gogh for one of Larry Shaw's amateur magazines. That was really
the first critical work in the usual chemical I did.
From what I've read of your, say, your collected essays and so forth, the things
that you've done in terms of criticism, I would say that probably your major
concern overall has been to deal with the question of science fiction as a
higher, to raise its literary standards perhaps, to make it something more than
just a kind of a second class kind of literature. And I wondered if you thought
that science fiction could ever compete with mainstream and characterization,
human relations, and so forth, or is it too limited to do that? Well, that was
my position, And I didn't see any reason why science fiction shouldn't be as
good as any other kind of fiction can be. I don't think now that it ever has
been.
And I still have, and I have a few doubts now about whether it can be. But at
that time, as you say, my effort was to try to raise the standards, improve the
breed, mainly by shooting cripples.
you maybe have some doubts now whether science fiction could ever produce
somebody like say a Dostoevsky then yeah of course mainstream hasn't produced
another Dostoevsky either so these comparisons are really not much help but in
the 50s there was a really strong invigorating movement to upgrade science
fiction in certain ways by lifting it out of the Pope formulas. H.L. Gould was
responsible for part of that and Tony Boucher for another part, and it really
seemed to me that we were on a plateau which could quite well be succeeded by
another plateau and so on, upward. And I think that was what I was pushing for.
I haven't seen it happen. We have some very good work being done, very literary
work, But it doesn't seem to me that the field as a whole has advanced as much
as I expected it would beyond the 1950s.
Would you see any big changes in the field since you began? Oh, muchos. I
started reading in 1933 and picked up all the back issues I could find in second
-hand bookstores in Portland. and the situation in the 30s
was a little fragmented. By that time, Gernsback had lost his magazines, and he
didn't have Gernsback in SF anymore. His idea was to teach science through
science fiction. He didn't always do it, but that was his ideal. And then you
had his successor at Amazing Stories, T. O'Conor Sloane, who was then in his 80s.
I never met him, but he was described as a marvelous, white-bearded old
gentleman who considered science fiction a sort of a hobby. What he liked was
archaeology. And he really did not have any of the technocratic fervor that
Gernsback has. In fact, he said in print more than once that he didn't believe
that space travel would ever happen. And then you had
astounding stories which in the early 30s was strictly a rather low grade
adventure magazine their contribution to the field was to import the stereotypes
of adventure fiction which worked very well and we still see that thread running
through science fiction right up to the present time and then in the late 30s
37, 38 John Campbell took over astounding and more or less transformed it he
raised the level in a certain direction he wanted scientific accuracy or at
least a semblance of it lack of scientific ignorance he wanted plausible stories
about the future not the usual triad of a brave hero and his jodhors and amen,
and the fainting heroine and the mad scientist. So in that sense, and also
because he got a, um, stable of very good writers in the early 40s, that raised
the level considerably, markedly. And then as I say, Gold and Boucher and others
came along in the 50s, and there was another quantum leap. And it seemed to me
that that was the natural course of the dance. What we wanted was another
quantum leap. so on until there would be no distinguishable difference in terms
of quality between science fiction and mainstream. And as I say, I don't think
that happens. Some of those quantum leaps in the past that you've mentioned have
been due, I think, to, as you said, to some of the more influential editors. Do
we have editors today who still have that kind of influence? Well, I think we
have certainly influential editors, but I don't think they're trying to do that.
I think they're trying to produce what they conceive the reading public wants
and they're very successful at it. George Sithers, for example, is a very sharp
editor. And Stanley Schmidt, I think, is doing an excellent job with analog. And
of course Ed Furman has been working along with fantasy and science fiction for
many years. Publishing a lot of really neat stuff. Fantasy and science fiction
has always had a more literary cast. and the other magazines, partly because
it's about half and half fantasy and science fiction, as the name would suggest.
And for some reason, the literary quality of fantasy writing has tended to be
higher than that in science fiction.
Okay, listen, when you began your Orbit anthologies in 1966, what kind of hopes
did you have for them? What was your idea behind them? Well, in the first place,
I just thought there was a marketing strategy there that hadn't been explored.
Please forgive my costs.
It seemed to me that with hardcover publication, if you could get book club and
paperback, you'd have a basis on which you could pay very good rates and get a
broad audience. and that because it was hardcover, originally you wouldn't have
to worry about some of the pulp cliches on the juvenile reader. And that didn't
work either. Orbit never did achieve the sales that I hoped for or the
publishers hoped for. It got a few book club sales but not many. It wasn't every
issue, it should have been. And the paperback never did sell very well. So after
they went to harbor with the series, they couldn't get paperback at all, and
that was what made them cancel it after a while. They hung on quite a long time.
They were very decent about it. But eventually they saw that this wasn't going
to happen.
Well, was that the first anthology of original science fiction that was
published? No, it was not. Fred Poole had done a series called Star. Let me
think. It must have been in the late 50s. I forget. and before him there had
been a couple of one shot original anthologies I've forgotten who the editors
were, let me think I used to I think the first one actually goes back quite a
way it was something rather inconspicuous and nobody paid much attention but
Fred was the first series of anthologies of original science fiction stories In
terms of the I guess the literary level of the orbit series, so you must be
proud of that through some of those years, that I think the majority of the
Nebula Award stories came from orbit, didn't they? For a couple of years, it was
scoring heavily in the nebulas, yeah. But I don't really know whether that has
anything to do with the quality of the stories, or just because I was
conspicuous at the time, I was the president of SFWA.
Yeah, that leads me onto the next area I want to talk about. You had a large
part in the founding of that. Could you explain your part in that and why you
were interested in starting it? Well, about ten years earlier, it must have
been, there was an effort to form a guild of science fiction writers, and I went
to one or two of their meetings, and it was pitiful because they used the
parliamentary procedure and they had 50 people all arguing, and they finally
hammered out a set of bylaws and elected officers, and then nothing happened.
The officers all went home and died. And I realized at that time that there was
a very easy way to do it. You didn't have to have the big meetings, and you
didn't have to have all that apparatus. One person could do it. But I didn't
think I was conspicuous enough at that time. I didn't think anybody knew who I
was. Later on, I was becoming more visible, and I realized that I probably could
do it. the precipitating event was by receiving in the same week three requests
for anthology reprints for flat fees, which I thought was unfair to the author.
So I wrote a flyer, the one-page thing, advising authors not to sign agreements
for flat fee anthology reprints, and saying, if you'd like more information of
this kind, send in your three bucks and become a charter member of SFWA. So I
got a flock of responses. When I had about 78, I declared them the charter
members and wrote a set of bylaws and sent that around, and we were more or less
in business. Okay, and what did you serve? One or two years as president? I did
two terms. Okay, and you'd have to look back. Wouldn't you have to judge it
today as a successful organization? I think so. I think it's done more for
members than any other writer's organization that I know of. We got about 9,000
bucks in back royalties for Tolkien and lots of things for
isn't that awful, her name just popped out of my head. Andrew Norton. And we've
settled a lot of grievances. The latest one was a really terrible new contract
which Davis Publications began to use. Just an awful contract. Gobbling up both.
every right conceivably attached to a story, and we made such a stench that they
withdrew it.
About a year ago, we talked to Norman Spinrad, I guess, who's the current
president, and he said he was interested in working on internationalizing or
hooking up with some of the European organizations. Do you think that's a good
idea? There's a lot of feeling among the members that we ought to be more
international than we are. I always resisted that because it didn't seem to me
that we could work effectively for writers living abroad and not publishing in
this country. I guess it's harmless. I don't see that it could do us any damage.
Okay, let me move on to one more area before I get down to just a few questions
on your own work. I guess you realize I'll probably have to ask something about
the Milford Science Fiction Writers Conference. Could you also give me a brief
statement on the genesis of that? Well, this was in the mid-50s, and for some
reason, Judy Merrill and I got talking about the idea of having a writer's
conference in Milford, Pennsylvania, which is a very small town in the Poconos.
It was sort of the way you might talk about building a boat in the basement, and
nothing was done about this until Judy and I went to the World Con in Detroit, I
think it was, and discovered that he was much more better than we realized.
Well, that energized us, and we thought that possibly if we invited people to
the military, they could actually come. And we sent out the invitation. We got
Jim Wish to join the masthead, lend it more respectability, and this was the
year in which the following year of New York, so it was easier for people to get
out there directly afterwards. Then we got 40 people. Just amazing. It was quite
intense. We had evening discussions that went on for several hours with people
raising parts of hands to do the next to speak. Quite exciting. So we decided to
do it annually. After the first one, we didn't have a World Con near us to
provide all that many people. and the attendance dropped to, I don't know, 15 or
so. When it gradually came up again, we began to get a bunch of regulars who
came every year and then there'd be a few more and so on. So in the later years,
we got up to about 25 or 30, which was really as much as we could handle in the
workshops, which by then had become a regular feature of Milford, where
everybody would submit a manuscript or two. And then every morning we'd all sit
around having read these manuscripts and discuss them in turn around the
surface.
This is probably an obvious question, but I want to ask it anyhow to see your
response. Do you think writers are, what kind of benefit, what kind of benefit
would writers get from that? Have they been benefited? Well, this is a question
that Katie and I ask ourselves every year because we teach at Clarion, which is
an outgrowth of Milford. And you can certainly point to lists of distinguished
ex-Milfordites and Marianites. It is a distinguished list. But whether that
proves anything or not is another question. You have to have a control group
which we have never had. I can testify that if you could help me in a specific
way. the workshop helps. People point out what it was in your story that you
absolutely haven't seen, sometimes crucially.
And, again, just from my own experience, it seems to me that learning to
criticize other people's stories technically enables you eventually to criticize
your own, which is a difficult thing at all. It becomes a little bit easier to
see the flaws in your own.
okay you're not associated with the Milford conference anymore then no, we had
to stop doing it five or six years ago don't hold me to the number because I'm
very weak on dates it turned out that year that we had signed up for so many
things in the summer that were going to have to drop something and it couldn't
be clarion we were committed to that so we had to stop doing Milford and it
wasn't really a a painful loss to us by that time because our old gang
dispersed.
We had moved away from Milford first to Florida and then to Oregon. And it just
wasn't the same thing anymore. It was turning into more of a sort of mini
clarion where you had the chiefs and the Indians. Katie and I were the chiefs
and the rest were Indians which had not been the case at all at Milford. That
was by design and practice. a group of peers. So that Milford, as it has turned
out, has become sort of a duplication for us of what we were doing at Clarion.
Ed Bryan has done it a couple of times, about every year, in Denver or
thereabouts. And it is still going on. But the difference between the two, like
you said, the Clarion would be more for actual beginners, where you would be the
teacher rather than peers.
Okay, let me just move on while we have some time to your own work because I
have some questions on that I'm not sure what your intended titles were but the
two novels A for Anything and Analog Men they're also known as The People Maker
and Hell's Pavement what are the titles you prefer? Analog Men and Hell's
Pavement were my titles they were retitled by paperback editors they used to do
that a lot they don't do it for much anymore
the Okay, the
A for anything was called the people maker though wasn't it? No, it was first A
for anything The first book publication was the paperback which was retitled by
the paperback editor but I published portions of it in magazines and one of them
had the title that I preferred A for anything
I hate the title of the people maker Okay in that book The A for Anything I'm
sure you've gotten questions on this in fact I know you have but the totally
unexpected ending that comes up at least I as a reader expected the protagonist
I forget his name right now to become sort of a good guy to overcome his
training and to let the old slave live and to marry the woman and so forth why
did you choose to have him revert to his stratified, slave-oriented society?
Well, what you're talking about, the ending that you expected is the cliche
ending, romantic and sentimental. I wanted to do a realistic ending. I thought
that the happy ending to that, you know, a conventional, quote, happy ending to
that novel would have been false. And this was one of the things that's
interesting in writing the novel in the first place. You know, anything I've
done, except for the slapstick. I was trying to do science fiction
realistically. I thought that was part of the new wave. It wasn't called that
then, but the wave of realism that came in the 50s. And I was awfully enthired,
still I am, of the romantic cliches of science fiction.
Okay, the device that you put into that novel, The Gizmo, The Transform Society,
it's kind of ironic that a device like that which can give people whatever they
want would lead to a slave master society do you think that's the way it would
work or would you be being deliberately pessimistic? well, I thought it was
logical I was counter-punching in that novel against some other treatments of
the same device the same gadgets that had been published before which I thought
were cop-outs. For instance, George Oak Smith wrote one in which the matter-to
-date duplicator was invented, and of course chaos ensued, and he rescued the
world by inventing a kind of currency that couldn't be duplicated. And that was
one too many rabbits out of the hat, I thought. So, again, I just wanted to do
it realistically. It seemed to me that if I had made a good case that, in fact,
slavery would be the No, I admit that it was an imaginative projection. I don't
necessarily defend the idea that that's what would happen in practice. And
another writer, several years later, I'll think of his name if I possibly can,
wrote a story in response to that one, which really delighted me. I like this
dialogue aspect of science fiction, in which he showed that a good marketer, a
good businessman, could get along perfectly well and make money, even if there
was a matter duplicative. Marvelous story.
When A for Anything and Analog Men, when those were published in the 50s, there
wasn't much critical science fiction. Was there maybe, things like The Space
Merchants, your books remind me of, We are criticizing a consumer-oriented
society. There wasn't much of that those days, was there? No, I think Fred Gould
and Ezele Cure was the space merchant's gravy planet, it was called and it was
published in the magazine, was a stunning rejection of the kind of dramatic
cliché that has been dominant in science fiction up to a new time. There had
been social satire in science fiction for a long time before, during science
fiction. And the magazine published some of it, but it was pretty remote. It
didn't have the cutting edge that gravy plan it had.
Okay, maybe just one question on Analog Man.
I think that you're contrasting the scientist, Cusco or Cusco, whatever his name
is, who invents, of course, the device which causes the analog and leads to the
kind of society they have in Laudermilk, the more humanitarian type. But in
their own ways, they're both very narrow. And are you saying that they're both
using the wrong methods? I'm not sure why you call Laudermilk narrow. Well, I
guess because he would use killing to achieve his aims. Well, again, I was
dragged into that. I liked Loudermilk, and I would have been personally happy to
make him just a nice old man. But logically, I couldn't see any way to keep that
organization alive or to achieve a bane without killing anybody. I didn't like
doing that. And I thought it did give a sort of moral ambiguity to the whole
underground. But I would rather do that than paper over the problem.
okay I understand in other words at the end of that novel when gosh I forget his
name Arthur or something like that when he becomes part of the underground
movement and he ends the novel admiring water milk then the reader is supposed
to feel the same way in your estimation well in fact I think I ought to have
provided a viewpoint character who would have had a little more doubts about
what water milk was up to But it couldn't have been Arthur because he wasn't
that sophisticated.
Okay, in reference to both of those books and to some of your short stories,
particularly some of your better known ones like Country of the Kind or Masks, I
see a strain of pessimism in your work. Is that simply a counter to the romance
and stereotypes you saw in science fiction? Or does that that I'm not a
pessimistic person in my daily life.
I hate the word optimistic, but I'm cheerful most of the time. And I have a lot
of fun. I don't worry too much about disasters in the future. I certainly don't
enjoy seeing people slip on banana peels. But I like irony and surprising people
in some stories.
that disliked very much the story that because everything is going to be rosy
and vivid in a very implausible way and everybody lapsed it up. I don't know
why.
Okay. In Country of the Kind, maybe I'm seeing too much in that, but I caught
maybe a little satire on humanitarianism, overdoing humanitarianism, for
instance.
No, I don't think that was what I was after. This came out of a remark in Hell's
Pavement. Let me think. Actually, it was in Loudermilk's journal, and he talked
about a dream he had had of the future they were going to achieve in which
everybody would be psychically healthy. And there probably wouldn't be any art
or any humor. and I think I picked that up from something in Robert Graves'
novel Watch the Norquan Drive his future society was like that everyone was
terrifically healthy mentally but there were no jokes nobody nobody laughed at
jokes and let me think the art that art didn't come into grave but I just began
to wonder
Would there be any artistic creation in a world in which everybody was
completely healthy mentally? Again, this is a proposition that seemed to be
interesting to a floor. I wouldn't defend it necessarily. I think there's
something to it, though. I think that art comes out of some kind of a pinch that
you get in your childhood and that if you really had a healthy society there
simply wouldn't be anything to make good art out of. Just recently I run across
a reference to a painting of Picasso's which I'd never heard of before it's
called War and Peace and it's in two parts on the left side you see war and
there are all kinds of fascinating demons running around on the right side all I
could think of for peace was a bunch of old men playing handpipes just quite
well. And it just seemed to me that a completely healthy and peaceful world
would be rather bloody hell.
Okay. I imagine one of your better known stories is that humorous one, To Serve
Man. I wondered if there was an impetus behind that one. You wondered if there
was a witch? An impetus or a particular idea from which it originated? Oh, that
came out of a remark by my second wife when she was pregnant with our first
child. She was looking forward to the delivery and she imagined the doctor
holding up the kid and flapping on the buttocks and herself saying give him one
for me. And that became the last line of the story. No, not the last line but
pretty close to it.
Yeah, I remember now, I read that. Story ideas can come out of anywhere.
Something somebody says, just a word or a phrase, or something you see in the
grocery store.
Sometimes, so trivial, you can't imagine where the story itself comes from, but
it sort of accreets itself around almost any sharp object. One of your later
books, I think the stories go back a ways, but one of the later published books
that you've had, The World in Thorin. To me, it was, of course, very different
than most of your other work. And I wondered why you decided to try your hand at
fantasy. What makes you call it fantasy? I'm curious because a lot of people
have thought that. Boy, I don't know what else to call it. Why wouldn't you call
it science fiction?
Well, okay, one of my questions was going to be, you provide some background
there. For instance, I get the idea, if it's the earth, that it had been
overheated and some scientists have had to move it and perhaps creatures went
underground and formed these societies and caverns. I guess if that background
were extrapolated or extended, it could be seen as science fiction. I guess I
didn't make that plain enough. I thought I had, in the introductory sections of
the chapters, I thought I had laid out more or less what happened the film was
about to go Nova
people made a spaceship out of the earth and propelled it out of the solar
system and also went underground to accommodate the increasing population put
the planet under the control of a central computer and then there was a war
which destroyed civilization the complete control was turned over to computers
and was directed to do whatever was necessary for the welfare of human beings.
And since the computer had not been told what welfare meant to human beings, it
had to try to figure out what was the best society. And therefore, having sealed
up these caverns in order to prevent another war, it promoted the growth of
different kinds of cultures. Each one in each little cavern. Hoping to find out
eventually what the best one was. Hoping to pass. But that was the world in
which the novel takes place in. I really thought I had indicated that
sufficiently, but perhaps not. Well, you did near the end of the book, but I
think maybe what threw me off in particular was the beginning of it, where you
sort of present a Scandinavian-type society at the beginning, which immediately
connoted to me in Middle Ages and medievalism and that kind of fantasy. Yes, I
know, but there have been lots of science fiction stories. I think too many, in
fact, written about the future world in which we've gone back to feudalism.
Okay. A little earlier, you mentioned that when you were—I think you made a
statement about fantasy. Did you say that fantasy could be deeper than science
fiction? No, I didn't mean to say that. I was talking about Ed German's fantasy
and science fiction. I think the quality of that magazine, although variable,
that is the quality of the writing, has been a little higher than most science
fiction magazines because of the presence of the fantasy writers. There's a long
tradition of literacy, good writing, fantasy we haven't had in science fiction.
Do you have a useful distinction that could distinguish science fiction and
fantasy for me? Sure. Science fiction is a branch of fantasy. That's all it is.
It's that branch which appeals which or let me start over which helps to create
suspension of disbelief in the reader by appealing to the authority of science.
It doesn't mean there's necessarily any science stories are usually in, but it
throws up this cloud of authority by referring to something. And then you can
relax and say, well, this is the thing that this could actually happen.
Okay, I have about just two or three more questions. Can you handle that? Sure.
Okay.
What's your reaction to critics' response to your own work? well really i
haven't had a whole lot of trouble with critics when i do get an unfavorable
review i consider the source so i mean say well that turkey do you understand
the book or whatever i've very seldom had to reply to a critic i think it's a
mug game do so unless you can nail them to the wall with some factual error
okay uh I got a hold of that volume that was, I think it was, Barry Maltzberg
put it together, The Best of Dame and I, I think it was. Near the end of that
book was that story down there, in which you remarked that hardly anybody had
seen the purpose of that one. So I worked on it. Tell me what you saw. Okay.
a society which is too sterile which has removed itself from its roots this man
can write stories actually the computer writes the stories he just chooses
certain things, buttons to push but he finds that he needs something which is
more of a low-life, nitty-gritty real-life nature and he seeks it out in a sort
of a clandestine way that's right and I think the only part that people didn't
get because I really didn't want to say it was that sometime in the recent past
there's been a race war and the black skinned people of this country have been
wiped out and everybody else is carrying a terrific load of guilt there are no
more Negroes in Maryland instead we've imported Appalachian people to fill the
place if you look at the dialogue in the way they're referred to you see that
they are Appalachian people little boys tucking into a platter of frozen greens
and so on they're white but they're southern and he's attracted to this
prostitute who appears in the last scene because she's so dark that she might
almost be meanware okay, good could you tell me what kind of future work plans
you have for your own fiction I'm staring down the last couple of chapters of a
novel which is under contract with Berkley called The Man in the Tree.
I should have told you that the last one, The World of Thorinn, is a book
that I was hung up on for 15 years. I walked on it intermittently for all that
time. I'd write a chapter and then I'd come to another stone wall and then it's
back off. I finally got the thing finished and that's what's the block. Now I'm
trying to write not with speed but it's possible I ever did. The reason the
block I think was that I set myself as an impossible task. As you know, that
novel is divided into episodes almost every one of which takes place in a new
culture. I have to invent the culture and its history and customs and all that
stuff. It was just absurdly difficult.
weren't some of the episodes in that published separately as short stories
that's why Fred Pohl ran, I think, three of them in Galaxy and you have to go
pretty far back in the files to find them because this took me 15 years to
finish them
okay, listen, Mr. I could keep on asking questions for a long time but I think
this is probably enough we've taken enough of your time listen, what we do is
now we will edit these into shows our program is aired every day for five
minutes so we'll probably get five or six shows out of this we're probably
talking about maybe six weeks to two months into the future so when they're
edited and done we'll send you copies okay, and listen one more question, do you
think if we wrote in a few months your wife might consent to an interview also?
I'm sure she'd love to okay, we might do that then and listen, we appreciate
your time very much it's been a pleasure and keep up the work okay okay okay
goodbye bye bye